♪ Opening Song ♪
[birds chirping]
[MAN ON BOAT sighs]
It's so peaceful.
[GINKO]
You can say that again.
[MAN ON BOAT] But when it's
this nice and sunny every day,
people tend to get lazy.
You ever noticed that?
My wife doesn't want to get
out of bed in the morning.
Sometimes she sleeps so late,
she doesn't even bother
to make breakfast!
Well, you know
what they always say:
a spring night knows no dawn.
[MAN ON BOAT] She's also been
very forgetful lately.
The last time
she went to the market,
she left our kid behind.
She didn't even
remember bringing him!
[GINKO]
That's pretty bad.
You'll be lucky if
she hasn't forgotten you
by the time you get home.
Heh. At this point,
that might be a good thing.
Tell me something.
Your wife, does she have any
trouble sleeping at night?
Mmm? No, and she
snores like a bear.
Good. That's a relief.
What are you talking
about? It's not "good"!
She's so loud I can't sleep!
[GINKO] I've got some
medicine for snoring.
[MAN ON BOAT]
Really? Does it work?
[GINKO]
Thanks.
Excuse me.
About what you said...
Hm? You mean
the snoring medicine?
No. About forgetting things.
Is there some connection
between that
and having trouble
sleeping? Is it bad?
[GINKO] Why? Do you know
someone like that?
[KAJI]
I'm home!
Mom?
Kaji! Please!
You've got to help me!
There's a strange
creature here!
Creature?
Do you mean this crab?
You've forgotten these, too?
They come up from the river
about this time every year.
Remember?
What? Really? Are you sure?
Oh, hi! You're one of
Kaji's friends!
Nice to see you again!
You've never met him.
This is a mushi master.
His name is Ginko.
He's a what?
Hi. Mind if I come in?
Please do!
I'm Kaji's mother, Sayo.
[KAJI]
She's like that all the time.
Don't get me wrong,
she's always been
a little clumsy.
And she's forgotten things
from time to time before.
But ever since last spring,
the things she forgets
seem more and more bizarre.
After a busy day
with lots of customers,
I used some of the money
I made to buy some Dango;
her favorite food.
Kaji, these are delicious!
I've never tasted
anything like them before.
What are you talking about?
You've had these before.
No, I haven't!
What are you saying?
That I secretly eat these
when no one's around?
[KAJI]
I couldn't believe it.
She'd completely forgotten
all about Dango.
Then, on another day...
[SAYO] I was thinking
about selling the ones
that I don't wear too often.
What's the matter?
[SAYO]
Is this one mine?
I don't recall
having one like this.
[KAJI]
Of course it is!
You kept it safe
because it was expensive.
[SAYO]
I did? Ah!
Now I remember this old thing!
It didn't look good on me,
so I never wore it.
[KAJI] Among the kimonos
that she rarely wore,
she only forgot about the ones
with prints on them.
It sure is cold
out there today.
[KAJI]
Mmm.
[sneezes]
Hey! Don't scare me like that!
Why would you do such
a strange thing, anyway?
What do you mean, "strange"?
[sniffs]
All I did was sneeze!
What's that?
[KAJI] She had forgotten
what a sneeze was.
Then, when we went to visit our
relatives for New Year's...
[SAYO] Kaji. Who are
those two? In the back.
[KAJI]
Uncle Masa and Aunt Mitsu.
[SAYO] And what about
the girl next to them?
That's your little sister!
Even her sister.
Just forgotten.
That is strange.
It's not just forgetfulness,
sounds like progressive amnesia.
Exactly. And now...
she stays up all day
and night working,
never sleeping.
She used to rest more often
and take naps in between work,
underneath that tree outside.
There's definitely
something wrong with her.
Come on! Dinner's ready!
You too, Ginko.
Please, join us. Though
I warn you, it's not fancy.
[GINKO]
Kaji.
After dinner, I need you
to do something for me.
Write down everything that
your mother has forgotten.
Who's that for?
I'm sorry. Don't mind it.
It's something I do for my
husband who's away on business.
Your husband?
Yes. He's a traveling merchant,
and he spends most
of the year on the road.
I've heard that setting
him a place keeps him
from going hungry
during his travels.
It's silly, but it
eases my conscience.
[GINKO] I sure hope
she hasn't forgotten
that he died or something.
Bless this food.
Mom... I thought I told you
that was wasteful.
It's not that much food, Kaji.
[KAJI] But you take it out
of our portions to make it.
Well, who do you
think your father
is traveling around for, anyway?
I'm sure he's hungrier
wherever he is
than we are here at home.
Yeah, but still...
He should get a job
closer to home.
For all the time he's gone,
he doesn't make much.
Kaji...
[KAJI] He should have
been home by now.
He hasn't even
written us a letter.
I think the reason
you've been forgetting things
is because he makes you worry.
--I wish he'd just--
--Stop it right now!
[SAYO]
Kaji!
[door slams]
[SAYO] Eating and running off
like that. How rude...
I'm sorry about that.
He just wants his father
to come home, too.
He misses him terribly.
See, my husband...
He's a nice man.
Probably too nice
for his own good.
He was most likely
helping someone
and then got caught up or lost.
I don't think his father
is the only person that
your son is worried about.
[SAYO] I know.
He asked you to come here
and help me with
my condition, didn't he?
[GINKO] Yes. He's told me most
of what's been going on.
Tell me, do you know
what's happening to me?
I don't. Not yet, anyway.
[SAYO]
Oh. I see...
I'm asking you as well.
If you can find a way to,
please help.
For my son's sake.
I'm afraid that
if this keeps up,
one day I'll wake up to
discover that I've forgotten
my husband and son, as well.
Worse still
is the possibility that
I'll forget that I've forgotten.
[SAYO] That's what
scares me the most.
[GINKO]
All done?
Yeah. I think so.
Hey, what are you doing?
[GINKO sighs]
I was trying to see
if there's a common thread
or a pattern to the memories
she's forgotten,
but I don't see one.
[loom clacks]
Hey. Do the relatives
that she forgot about
have anything in common?
Yeah. They all live on
the other side of the river.
We never see them,
not even at the market.
[GINKO] I see. It seems
she's forgetting the things
she has the least
contact with first.
[GINKO]
No. If that were the case,
she would've forgotten
her husband a long time ago.
[sighs]
It's getting pretty late,
but it still doesn't look
like she's going
to get any sleep.
She says she can't sleep.
Not even if she tries to.
That's why she can
stay up all night weaving.
While she's working,
she also uses the time
to think about Dad
over and over
so she won't forget him.
[GINKO]
I see.
If she could
at least get some sleep,
it would be easier
for her to wait for him.
[loom clacks]
[GINKO]
The warm breeze.
The fragrance of the flowers.
The sound of the loom.
[loom clacks]
[GINKO] If this is how
all of her nights are...
...I can't think of any
reason that she wouldn't
be drawn into
a deep, deep sleep.
[GINKO] Mm. Looks like she's
finally starting to nod off.
[GINKO]
She's already waking up?
Oh! Morning already?
[gasps]
[SAYO]
Time to make breakfast.
Mm? What's the matter?
[GINKO] So that's it.
Just as I suspected.
A mushi that eats memories?
Yes. It's known
as a Kagedama.
It's dark, and translucent,
and it has
a membrane-like form.
It likes to hide out in the
shadows of large, old trees...
There, it waits for animals
and people to rest.
While they sleep,
the mushi enters the ear
and makes it's way to the brain.
After that,
the host rarely sleeps,
and little by little, they
gradually lose their memories.
[SAYO] It lives in the shadow
of that cherry blossom
in the garden?
[GINKO]
Yes. Most likely.
Once it consumes
enough memories,
the mushi divides itself.
The new half is then
sent out of the host's body
during a brief moment of sleep
to hide in the shadows
of nearby trees.
That's how they reproduce.
By nature,
they're weak and fragile,
and can vanish if they remain
in the sunlight for too long.
I'm sorry. But since
this mushi has already
imbedded itself into your brain,
there's nothing we can do.
Wait! You mean
there's no cure?!
The only known weakness
of the Kagedama is sunlight,
so we've got nothing.
There's no way to shine
sunlight in your brain.
[GINKO] But it might still be
possible to protect the memories
you don't want to forget.
Huh?
As an example, let's say
memories are stored
in the same way that drawers
hold things inside a closet.
Your memories of Dangos,
relatives that live
far away, sneezes...
They are all
categorized and filed
into countless
different drawers.
The Kagedama takes
the whole drawer out,
one drawer at a time.
The order it chooses
doesn't seem to have
anything to do
with your interests.
It appears to be
completely random.
But... there's still hope.
There's a set of memories the
Kagedama hasn't touched yet.
The things that you do
repeatedly every day.
The things
that you see and think.
Like how to cook,
how to weave on the loom,
the memories of your son,
the husband that you
set a place for everyday.
The mushi probably
leaves the memories
pertaining to the basics
of daily living until last
to prolong the host's life
as much as possible.
So... you're saying
I won't forget those things?
It's just a theory.
I don't know for sure.
It could be that later on,
if your supply of memories
starts to deplete,
the mushi might begin to prey
on those vital ones, as well.
So, with that in mind,
my suggestion would be this:
Store up as many
memories as possible,
and continue to think about the
ones you don't want to forget
over and over again.
I understand.
I'll try my best.
You can do it, Mom.
And instead of
always staying home,
you should go out sometimes.
You're right.
Maybe I'll do just that.
Instead of waiting here
for your father,
maybe I should
go out and find him.
Huh?
[SAYO]
Stop making that silly face.
Come on.
I've thought about
doing this for a while now.
I'm just scared. Scared to
find out what happened
to keep him away
from home for so long.
But not anymore.
I'm tired of waiting.
You think you can find him?
I do. Your father often
spoke of a city in the west.
It's at least a good place
to start looking.
[GINKO]
Is she going to be all right?
And you'll come along
and help me, right? Kaji?
[KAJI]
This is it.
[GINKO]
Right.
Thanks for everything.
No, thank you.
Be careful, okay?!
[SAYO]
You too! Take care!
[GINKO] Even as I was leaving,
I didn't know for sure
if that decision was
what was best for them.
[GINKO]
I found out what happened
a little more
than a year later.
[GINKO]
Ah! I see you've returned!
[KAJI]
Ginko!
Good afternoon! Welcome!
What would you like?
[MALE CUSTOMER]
Hmm. Let me see...
Your mother seems well.
I was wondering about her.
[KAJI]
Yep.
[GINKO]
Did you find your father?
[KAJI] Yeah. He was
in that city to the west.
And he was living there
with a different family.
[indistinctive chatter]
[MERCHANT]
Sure! I know him!
He lives just down
the road. That way.
[BABY fussing]
[FATHER]
There we go!
[BABY giggles]
[FATHER, MOTHER laugh]
[MOTHER]
You like that?
Mom! Why didn't you
at least say something?!
Mom! Why?
[KAJI] On the way back,
Mom walked silently
never saying a word.
She just kept moving,
never stopping to eat or sleep.
Until finally...
[KAJI]
Mom. You need to...
Mom. Mom!
[KAJI] She collapsed
from exhaustion.
After that,
she remained asleep
for the next several days.
Morning already?
[KAJI] Something was here.
It just left.
Mom, are you okay?!
Well, of course I am.
Why? What's wrong?
[SAYO]
Mmm-mmm!
I slept like a log!
Looks like it's time
to start making breakfast.
Where are we?
What did you say?
Why are we here?
What are we doing
in this place, Kaji?
We're on our way back
from vacation.
[SAYO]
We are?
[SAYO'S stomach grumbles]
What was that?
What was that sound?
[KAJI] It's nothing.
Why don't we eat something?
[SAYO] Yeah! Good idea!
I'm starving.
[KAJI]
Yeah. Yeah, me too.
Hey Mom, after we eat,
let's go home.
[KAJI] That morning
when she awoke,
she had forgotten
almost everything.
All that remained
were memories of the house,
a few personal effects, and me.
Everything else was gone.
During the time that
she was depressed,
nearly all of her remaining
memories were eaten away.
But still, she remembers.
She remembers how to cook.
And she's still
never forgotten about me.
She's going outside
and making new memories
and experiences everyday,
just like you said she should.
She forgets most of them
by the next morning,
but I really think
she's enjoying herself
each and every day.
[GINKO] Does she still
have trouble sleeping?
[KAJI] Yeah. She stays up all
night working at the loom,
just like before.
I see. Same as always.
[chuckles]
That's Mom. Same as always.
[KAJI]
I'm home!
Welcome back!
Dinner's almost ready.
Go wash your hands
and clean up, okay?
[KAJI]
Mm-mmm.
What are you doing?
You set an extra
place again, Mom.
Uh.
So I did. But why did I do that?
It's just you and me.
I don't... I don't know
why I felt the need
to do something like that.
But for some reason,
setting that extra plate
makes me feel better.
Why is that?
[SAYO]
I wonder...
[NARRATOR] Next:
"Pickers of Empty Cocoons."